watch it as hard as you can
hi I'm Luke Ryan for Joe Blow calm and
welcome to movie endings explain where
we'll be taking a look at some of the
more ambiguous and discussed movie
endings they've left audiences debating
their true meaning long after the
credits of rolled for this installment
we're going to delve into the 1990
sci-fi movie Total Recall starring the
one and only Arnold Schwarzenegger
directed by Paul Verhoeven of showgirls
fame from a script penned by the
creators of alien and based on a short
story we can remember it for you
wholesale by philip k dick what resulted
was a sci-fi classic that won an Academy
Award for its excellent special effects
and is now viewed as a masterpiece mix
of violence film action fun and
thought-provoking science fiction
complexity the movie follows the same
kind of beginning is the short story but
has a very different conclusion and
being a feature-length movie is
obviously a lot more fleshed out along
with an obvious tailoring to the
one-liner
action style that Arnold Schwarzenegger
was so synonymous with at that point in
his career which have been cleaning this
same land the film is set in 2084 and
follows construction worker Douglas
Quaid who was happily married but longs
to go to Mars after having exotic dreams
about being there with a mysterious
woman he learns about a facility called
recall which gives you memory implants
of fictional holidays with the promise
of the trip totally emulating reality
Quaid eagerly signs up for a deluxe
secret agent fantasy package but before
he gets implanted with the fake memory
Quaid starts freaking out suppressed
memories of him actually being a secret
agent slowly coming back into his mind
instantly thrust into a plot to take his
life from unknown assailants Quaid needs
to get his ass to Mars for real and goes
on a wild adventure where he beats the
bad guys gets the girl and saves the
world in that broad sense the film is
very clear-cut Quaid is actually a
former secret agent known as Hauser
whose past had been obscured from him
and he returns to Mars to complete
unfinished business but it all seems
quite convenient doesn't it
when he gets sedated at recall he wakes
up in a Berserker like rage and the
staff explained to their boss it's not a
side-effect of the fake memory he's just
acting out the secret-agent portion of
his ego trip and the face that's not
possible why not because we haven't
implanted it yet but could it be that
the moment the Quaid goes under a recall
at just 18 minutes into the movie is the
last time we ever see reality and that
the freakout the machine is merely the
beginning of the hyper realistic ego
trip the recall promised Quaid there's
lots of clues to point towards this
first of all when Quaid is being sold
the package the manager recall lays out
the premise of the secret agent trip I
don't want to spoil it for your Doug but
you rest assured by the time the trip is
over you get the girl kill the bad guys
and save the entire planet now you tell
me isn't that worth a measly 300 credits
now he just laid out the rest of the
movie including the climax and how
convenient is that plus when Quaid is
being asked about his preference with a
woman he'll meet on his trip the
computer readout shows the exact
likeness of Malina
the woman he later meets on the screen
we even see a selection of ancient alien
artifacts on screen the last one looking
exactly like the structure we see on
Mars at the end of the film Malina is an
interesting point in all of this because
she also appears in the very first scene
of the movie Quaid stream about Mars if
the whole secret-agent plot really is
reality then it makes complete sense
that he's still dreaming about his
former girlfriend lost in the muddled
memories of his brain yet why does she
appear on that screen at the point that
we see her Quaid is already falling
under the influence of the sedatives so
it's possible that he's projecting
Molina's likeness onto the image of the
woman as he slips out of consciousness
otherwise it doesn't really make much
sense
there are also scenes in the film
without Quaid in them which don't make
sense as part of the ego trip memory
package and if they were part of it and
Quaid was somehow viewing them he'd know
too much about what was going on so it
makes sense that this isn't the ego trip
because it's not something he would be
experiencing as part of that or it could
just simply be that these are the things
that are there to make the movie work
better and to give us the audience the
motivations of the antagonist of the
story so maybe is just all one big
coincidence and Quaid really is Hauser
and all of the events of the movie
place in the reality of the story we're
seeing well not quite
the single biggest clue of the entire
movie is right before Quaid goes under a
recall the lead memory program a hands a
chip to her assistant technician and he
says this Ernie that's a new one
blue sky online married long that's a
new one
blue sky online married long it's a very
fleeting moment of dialog that's cut off
at the end by the woman's voice it's not
meant to be an obvious line that we're
meant to think is all that important the
line happens off screen while we're
focusing on a close-up of another action
it blends in with the scene and like a
fictional memory implant slips through
our consciousness without us realising
it's there at least at first blue sky on
Mars that's a new one well again that's
another prediction of the ending of the
movie with Quaid activating the ancient
alien technology to instantly terraform
Mars giving them breathable air and the
aforementioned
blue sky surely the only way to view the
movie if the sky is blue at the end is
as a dream the evidence for far
outweighs the evidence against if it
really all is a sophisticated ego-trip
artifice why did Quaid dream of Molina
beforehand unless the woman programmed
into the implant is shaped by the
recipients own subconscious you can go
back and forth with all the details in
this movie about whether it's a dream or
reality and one theory is that the movie
is both reality and a dream at the same
time not unlike the schrdinger's cat
theory which proposes that if you place
a cat inside a closed box with a
radioactive atom that can either decay
or emit radiation the cat remains both
alive and dead until the box is opened
and the state of the cat is observed
come on don't [ __ ] me
no challenger dug your brain will not
know the difference which to me seems a
little too close to the whole tree
falling with no one to hear it thing but
the key placed on observation and what
is movie watching if it is an
observation
the director of the film Paul Verhoeven
actually commented on the ending of
Total Recall very recently and here's
what he had to say Total Recall doesn't
say whether it's reality or it is a
dream you know it's really saying
there's this reality and there's that
reality and both exist at the same time
because you look at Total Recall
there is never a preference let's say
taken by me or the scriptwriter
to say this is really what he dreams
about and this is the truth I wanted it
to be that way because I felt it was
postmodern I felt that basically I
should not say this is true and this not
true we worked very hard to make both
consistent and that both would be true
and I think we succeeded very well so I
think of course there is no solution it
was innovative in movie language at
least to a certain degree that there
would be two realities and there is no
choice so very much in line with the
schrdinger's cat theory the answer is
the Total Recall is in fact both reality
and a dream and if that's too much to
wrap your head around or you think it's
a [ __ ] explanation you can simply
enjoy whichever answer gives you the
most enjoyment out of the film thank you
for watching and please let us know how
you feel about the ending of Total
Recall we'd love to hear your thoughts
[Music]
see at the party ring stuff